On Succinct Groundings of HTN Planning Problems
Gregor Behnke, Daniel Höller, Alexander Schmid, Pascal Bercher,∗ and Susanne Biundo

Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ulm University, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
gregor.behnke, daniel.hoeller, alexander-1.schmid,susanne.biundo@uni-ulm.de, pascal.bercher@alumni.uni-ulm.de

Abstract
Both search-based and translation-based planning systems
usually operate on grounded representations of the problem.
Planning models, however, are commonly deﬁned using lifted
description languages. Thus, planning systems usually generate a grounded representation of the lifted model as a preprocessing step. For HTN planning models, only one method
to ground lifted models has been published so far. In this
paper we present a new approach for grounding HTN planning problems that produces smaller groundings in a shorter
timespan than the previously published method.

Introduction
Most modelling languages for planning problems (such as
PDDL (McDermott 2000) and HDDL (Höller et al. 2020))
allow for specifying planning problems in a lifted fashion,
e.g. by allowing the modeller to specify the model using a
ﬁrst-order logical language. Actions are speciﬁed with parameters and the action’s preconditions and effects are speciﬁed using literals referring to these parameters. Using such
a lifted representation, a modeller can easily write models
with a large number of action instantiations without the need
to enumerate them explicitly. More importantly, a lifted representation enables the modeller to specify a single planning
domain that can be used in multiple planning problems without any change to the domain.
Unfortunately, to plan directly using only the lifted
model is quite difﬁcult. Most planners transform the lifted
input-model into a grounded model before planning. Planning is then performed on the grounded representation, either via search (Höller et al. 2018b; Bercher et al. 2017;
Helmert 2006) or via a translation into other problems, e.g.
SAT (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2019b; 2019a; 2018b;
Behnke and Biundo 2018; Behnke, Höller, and Biundo
2018a; Rintanen 2014; Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä
2006). Naively grounding the lifted representation by simply instantiating all its elements is seldom feasible due to
the huge size of the naively grounded model. Instead, the
∗
Pascal Bercher is now at the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the Australian National University
c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright ©
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

grounding procedure aims to remove as many unnecessary instantiations as possible. Unnecessary here means that
grounding of e.g. actions can be removed if they cannot be
part of a solution to the planning problem. Smaller groundings are generally advantageous to planners, as their persearch-node effort or the size of any translation decreases.
Further, even the quality of computed heuristics can improve
if “distractor actions” are removed. Even a small decrease in
the size of the grounding can signiﬁcantly impact the efﬁciency of the planner. As such, grounding is a critical step in
the process of planning.
For Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning (Erol,
Hendler, and Nau 1996), there is – as far as we know –
only a single paper concerned with grounding HTN planning domains (Ramoul et al. 2017), which is used in the
planner GTOHP. However, several other HTN planners plan
using a grounded model (e.g. FAPE (Dvorak et al. 2014)
and PANDA (Bercher, Keen, and Biundo 2014; Bercher et
al. 2017)), but there are no publications on their grounding
procedures. Lastly, Tree-Rex (Schreiber et al. 2019) uses a
yet unpublished improvement of GTOHP’s grounder.
In this paper we describe the grounding procedure that as
so-far been used by the HTN planner PANDA and a recently
developed improved version of the grounder called pandaPI.
We start by describing the lifted HTN planning formalism,
then give an overview of grounding in planning in general
and in HTN planning in particular. We describe the grounding procedure used by PANDA. Thereafter we present the
new and more systematic view on the HTN grounding process, which allowed us to create the new and highly efﬁcient
grounder pandaPI. Lastly, we compare the performance of
pandaPI with that of PANDA, GTOHP, and Tree-Rex.

Lifted HTN Planning Formalism
Before explaining the HTN grounding procedure, we start
by brieﬂy describing the formalism of lifted HTN planning.
We have based our formalism on the lifted one by Alford,
Bercher, and Aha (2015), which in turn is based on the formalism by Geier and Bercher (2011).
Assume that L = (P, T, V, C) is a quantiﬁer- and
function-free ﬁrst-order predicate logic with the following
elements. P is a ﬁnite set of predicate symbols. A predi-

pay-toll(?s, ?f)

pay-toll(?f, ?t)
load(?p, ?f)

navigate(?s, ?f)

unload(?p, ?t)
navigate(?f, ?t)

Figure 1: A task network in a transportation domain. If performed, it will transport a package from its initial location to
its target location. The variables ?s (start location), ?f (initial package location), and ?t (target package location) are
of type location. The variable ?p is of type package. Parallelism between the pay-toll and navigate tasks models that
the toll can be paid at any time while the transporter is on its
way from the one location to another.
cate’s arity deﬁnes its number of parameter variables (taken
from V ), each having a certain type (deﬁned in T ). T is a
ﬁnite set of type symbols. V is a ﬁnite set of typed variable
symbols to be used by the parameters of the predicates in P .
C is a ﬁnite set of typed constants.
HTN planning problems specify two types of tasks: Primitive tasks are identical to actions in classical planning and
are identiﬁed via a ﬁrst-order atom action(?v1 , . . . , ?vn )1
(e.g. drive(?f, ?t)). Their semantics is given via their preconditions pre – a conjunction of positive ﬁrst-order literals
over L – and effects eff – a conjunction of (positive and
negative) ﬁrst-order literals2 . The variables occurring in pre
and eff must be parameters, i.e. members of ?v1 , . . . , ?vn .
Applicability and the state transition semantics of actions is
deﬁned as in classical planning.
Abstract tasks are also described via ﬁrst-order atoms
task(?v1 , . . . , ?vn ). Their semantics is given in terms of
pre-deﬁned means for performing them, which are described
by decomposition methods M . A decomposition method
m ∈ M is a tuple (c, tn) consisting of an abstract task c
and a task network tn. A task network is a partially ordered
multi-set of actions and tasks.
Denition 1. A task network tn over a set of primitive and
abstract tasks X (rst-order atoms) is a tuple (I, ≺, α) with:
1. I is a nite set of task IDs.
2. ≺ is a strict partial order over I.
3. α : I → X × V maps task IDs to task and parameters

Note that pandaPI does also allow for specifying variable
constraints, i.e. equals and not-equals constraints on variables and constants. We handle them naively by checking
them and do not discuss them further in the paper for the
sake of brevity. As an example for a task network consider
the one shown in Fig. 1.
An HTN planning problem is then given by the problem’s
initial state sI (a set of ground positive literals or facts), a
set of available decomposition methods M , and the initial
abstract task cI which speciﬁes the goal.
1
We adopt the convention of PDDL (McDermott 2000) to denote variables with a preﬁxed question mark. I.e. ?a is a variable,
while a denotes a constant.
2
More complex representations are common in domain speciﬁcation languages, but can be compiled into this simplistic format.

navigate(?f, ?t)

unload(?p, ?t)

navigate(?a, ?c) 7→ drive(?a, ?b)
drive(?f, ?b)

navigate(?b, ?t)

navigate(?b, ?c)
unload(?p, ?t)

Figure 2: The ﬁrst row shows a task network tn1 . The second row shows a method for the navigate task. The result of
applying this method to the navigate task in tn1 results in
the task network shown in the third row.
The aim in an HTN planning problem is to reﬁne a given
initial abstract task cI into an executable, ground, primitive
task network. A task network is primitive if all tasks in it are
primitive. It is ground if all variables are assigned to constants. It is further executable if there is a linearisation of its
tasks that is executable in the initial state. Reﬁning the initial task network is performed via applying decomposition
methods to the abstract tasks contained in it and the resulting
task networks. Applying a decomposition method (c, tnc ) to
a task network tn means to replace an occurrence of the task
c in tn by the contents of the task network tnc .
Denition 2. Let m = (c(?x1 , . . . , ?xn ), tnm ) with tnm =
(Im , ≺m , αm )) be a decomposition method, and tn1 =
(I1 , ≺1 , α1 ) a task network. We assume that Im  I1 = ∅
and that the sets of variables occurring in tn1 and tnm
are disjunct, which can be achieved by renaming. Then, m
decomposes a task identier i ∈ I1 into a task network
tn2 = (I2 , ≺2 , α2 ) iff α1 (i) = c(?y1 , . . . , ?yn ) and
I2 = (I1 \ i)  Im
≺2 = (≺1  ≺m 
(i1 , i2 ) ∈ I1 × Im  (i1 , i) ∈ ≺1  
(i1 , i2 ) ∈ Im × I1  (i, i2 ) ∈ ≺1 )

\ (i′ , i′′ ) ∈ I1 × I1  i′ = i or i′′ = i
α2 = α1  \(i, c(?y1 , . . . , ?yn )) 
∗
))  (i, c(?z1 , . . . , ?zm )) ∈ αm ,
(i, c(?z1∗ , . . . , ?zm
∗
∀j :?zj =?yk iff ?zj =?xk , and ?zj∗ =?zj else

As an example for applying a decomposition method,
consider the task networks and the method shown in Fig. 2.

Grounding Planning Problems
Both theoretical research (Alford et al. 2016; Behnke et
al. 2016; Bercher et al. 2016; Höller et al. 2016; Behnke,
Höller, and Biundo 2015; Höller et al. 2014) and practical research (Schreiber et al. 2019; Höller et al. 2018b;
Behnke et al. 2019) on hierarchical planning is usually
done on grounded, i.e. variable-free models, instead of
lifted models. Especially newer search-based HTN planners like FAPE (Dvorak et al. 2014), GTOHP (Ramoul et
al. 2017), or PANDA (Bercher, Keen, and Biundo 2014;
Bercher et al. 2017) ground a given lifted planning problem
prior to search. A grounded model allows for both a more efﬁcient implementation and for easier to compute and more

concise heuristics. In contrast, the translation technique by
Alford et al. (2016) is executed on the lifted model – grounding is only performed on the resulting classical model.
In theory, computing a grounded model based on a given
lifted model is easy. One has to compute all possible instantiations of lifted predicates, primitive actions, abstract tasks,
and methods and replace their lifted versions appropriately
by them. For details regarding this full grounding process we
refer to Alford, Bercher, and Aha (2015). Such a grounding
will be exponential in size. Thus, a fully grounded model
is not useful in many practical cases, as handling it within
given memory and time limits is hard or even impossible.
In many planning problems, computing all instantiations
of all predicates, tasks, and methods is not necessary. For example, it is not necessary to create a grounding drive(l1 , l2 )
of the drive action if there is no road between the locations
l1 and l2 . For such an instantiation drive(l1 , l2 ), we know
a priori that its precondition can never be fulﬁlled3 . Thus
this action cannot be part of any plan. Ideally, we would like
to compute only those groundings of predicates, tasks, and
methods that occur in some solution to the planning problem. Determining whether this is the case is undecidable.
Theorem 1. The problem of deciding whether an action a
is part of some plan for a given HTN planning problem is
undecidable.
Proof. We can show the claim via a reduction from the
plan existence problem for HTN planning problems, which
is known to be undecidable (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996;
Geier and Bercher 2011). Let P be an HTN planning problem. We add a primitive action a without any precondition
and effects. Further, we add a new initial abstract task c∗I ,
which has only a single decomposition method yielding one
instance of a and the old initial abstract task cI of P without
any ordering constraint. Now, P has a solution if and only if
a is part of some plan for P.
Instead, we aim at computing an approximation of this
property. We are looking for a subset of all ground instances
of predicates, tasks, and methods such that all ground instances not included in that set are not contained in any solution. I.e., we disregard a ground instance if we can prove
that it cannot be contained in a solution. This approximation
entails a trade-off: with higher computation time, a better
approximation might be found.
This technique of approximate grounding is widely used
in classical planning. In general, an action is not included in
the grounding if it cannot be part of any executable plan in
the delete-relaxation of the problem. The delete-relaxation
of a planning problem is a copy of the problem in which all
negative effect literals are removed. Any action that is not
part of a plan in a delete-relaxed problem cannot be part of a
plan in the original problem. For a given action one can determine in polynomial time whether it is part of any deleterelaxed classical plan (Bylander 1994). The set of these actions is usually computed via a planning graph (Blum and
Furst 1997). Often, this reduction leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in the size of the grounded problem. Some planning
3

Assuming that there is no means to build new roads.

systems, like FF (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001), ﬁrst compute the full grounding and subsequently prune actions4 .
This, however, does not eliminate the bottle-neck of grounding, but makes the grounding smaller for the planning process itself. An efﬁcient implementation based on DATALOG
was proposed by Helmert (2009), which does not have this
bottle-neck of a full instantiation.
To the best of our knowledge there is currently only one
publication in the ﬁeld of HTN planning devoted to grounding, which is the grounder of GTOHP (Ramoul et al. 2017).
It uses a grounding procedure similar to that of FF – i.e. it
computes a full instantiaton and prunes subsequently – and
similarly uses the concept of inertia to prune tasks early during instantiation (Koehler and Hoffmann 2000). Inertia of a
predicate describe the ways its truth value can change while
a plan is executed – not at all, only from negative to positive
(or vice versa), or in both directions. In inertia-based simpliﬁcation, a primitive task whose precondition evaluates to
false under the computed inertia values is removed from the
planning problem, as it can never become executable. Subsequently, all methods it is contained in are removed as well.
If an abstract task has no applicable method remaining it is
likewise removed.
The recently published planner Tree-Rex (Schreiber et al.
2019) uses GTOHP’s grounding procedure but also prunes
abstract tasks that cannot be reﬁned into primitive actions
any more – even though they have applicable decomposition
methods. This leads to generally smaller groundings.
Note that GTOHP removes effectless actions from the
methods they are contained in (Ramoul et al. 2017). The respective methods are not pruned afterwards, but considered
part of the correct grounding without the removed effectless actions. According to the formalisation of HTN planning, these actions can however be contained in plans – and
pose constraints in them. As such it makes any found solution (potentially) invalid as it may not adhere to the solution
criteria of HTN planning. Secondly, the implementation of
GTOHP does not allow for two parameters of an action or
method to be instantiated with the same constant. Consider
as an example a method that paints two wooden boards ?b1
and ?b2 in colours ?c1 and ?c2 . GTOHP enforces that ?c1
and ?c2 are different without this constraint being a part of
the domain. This leads to an incomplete grounding, this time
when the (only) solution uses the method where both colours
are, e.g. red, as we only have red paint. For our evaluation,
we have ﬁxed both issues in the code of GTOHP.

PANDA’s Grounding
The HTN planning system PANDA has used a grounded
representation for planning since 2014. All techniques that
were published and evaluated using PANDA (e.g. (Behnke,
Höller, and Biundo 2019a; 2019b; Höller et al. 2018b;
Höller et al. 2018a; 2018c; Bercher et al. 2017; Behnke,
Höller, and Biundo 2017; Bercher, Keen, and Biundo 2014))
based upon a grounded model, while the benchmark in4

Note that FF uses the concept of inertia (Koehler and Hoffmann 2000) to simplify the preconditions and effects before full
grounding.

stances used in evaluations of PANDA are deﬁned using the
lifted language HDDL (Höller et al. 2020). Most of the techniques developed for PANDA (and pandaPI) originate in the
need to solve speciﬁc planning domains. Notably, the need
to handle the Monroe domain (Blaylock and Allen 2005),
which is plan recognition domain, lead to the development
of most of PANDA’s grounding algorithm.
So far, we have not published any description of PANDA’s
grounding process. We correct this shortcoming with this
paper and describe how the grounding procedure that has
been used in the previous evaluations of PANDA works. In
this section, we will give a short overview of the grounding
techniques used by PANDA. The grounding procedure used
by PANDA still had its shortcomings and problems. Thus,
we have developed a new grounder: pandaPI. It is based on
a new and more generic view on PANDA’s grounding procedure. This enables us to signiﬁcantly improve the performance compared PANDA’s grounder.
PANDA’s grounding procedure comprises three steps: a
lifted domain simpliﬁcation, a delete-relaxed reachability
analysis, and a hierarchical reachability analysis based on
the Task Decomposition Graph (TDG) (Elkawkagy et al.
2012; Bercher et al. 2017). The second and third step are executed once on the lifted input domain in order to ground
the domain. Thereafter they are repeated in order to reduce the size of the grounding even further. Algorithm 1
shows the overall mechanism of PANDA’s grounder. Iterating the reachability analysis is one of the major features of
PANDA’s grounder, as it enables ﬁnding smaller and more
concise groundings. Note that this is also the main difference between the grounding results found by PANDA and
Tree-Rex’s improved grounding (Schreiber et al. 2019). It is
based on the following observation: The TDG-based analysis can remove groundings of primitive actions, as they are
not reachable through the hierarchy any more. Such an action in turn might have been the only one that enables the
execution of other – yet unremoved – actions in the planning graph. Removing them might cause grounded decomposition methods to be removed. This again, might remove
other primitive actions.
As an example, consider the methods and primitive tasks
shown in Fig. 3. If we assume that the initial state is empty,
then only the actions a, c and d are delete-relaxed reachable.
Thus, the second method B 7→ a, b is not reachable as it
contains a task – b – that can never become executable. It
will thus be pruned from the grounded model. The remaining methods however still remain in the model after the TDG
has been computed. One however notices that removing the
method B 7→ a, b also removes the only possibility to obtain the action a via decomposition. It can thus be removed
from consideration, i.e. only c and d remain in the grounding. This is where GTOHP and Tree-Rex stop their analysis.
PANDA runs an additional delete-relaxed reachability analysis after a and b are pruned. Now, d is not reachable any
more, since it is not possible to achieve its precondition x
any more. Thus d can be pruned as well and consequently all
remaining methods, as well as c. This pruning might again
remove other actions from consideration and has thus to be
repeated until convergence to achieve a minimal model –

A 7→ B, C
B 7→ a, b
B 7→ c
C 7→ d

pre
a : 
b : z
c : 
d : x

add
x

y


del





Figure 3: Sample Decomposition Methods on the left, and
four actions with their preconditions and effects on the right.
which PANDA does.
Data: lifted HTN planning problem P
P = lifted domain simpliﬁcations(P);
Pg = planning graph(P);
(Ag , Mg , Pg ) = tdg(P,Pg );
Pg = (Pg , Ag , Mg );
while true do
Pg = planning graph(Pg );
(Ag , Mg , Pg ) = tdg(Pg ,Pg );
Pg∗ = (Pg , Ag , Mg );
if Pg = Pg∗ then
break
end
end
Algorithm 1: PANDA’s grounding procedure –
Overview. Variables are: Pg – grounded primitive
actions, Ag – grounded abstract tasks, Mg – grounded
methods
Next we will describe the individual steps of PANDA’s
grounder.

Parameter Splitting
As a ﬁrst step, PANDA performs simpliﬁcation operations
on the lifted model. For example, we compile disjunctions
in preconditions and conditional effects into additional actions, and compile away negative preconditions. Similarly,
we compile away variables occurring in preconditions and
effects (i.e. those that are contained in quantiﬁed expressions) into additional parameters.
Besides these common simpliﬁcations, PANDA performs
an HTN-speciﬁc simpliﬁcation operation on the lifted model
with the aim of reducing the size of the grounding. In some
HTN planning domains, lifted decomposition methods contain variables that are (1) used only as parameters of a single subtask and (2) which are not parameters of the abstract task. As an example, consider an abstract task A(?x)
with a method decomposing it into the tasks B(?x, ?y) and
C(?x, ?z). Further assume that all variables have the same
type t which contains the constants c1 , . . . , cn . If we
ground this method, it has up to n3 ground instances. Notably, we have to ground every possible combination of the
otherwise independent parameters ?y and ?z.
We can equivalently represent this method by three new
methods while introducing two new abstract tasks. Let these
abstract tasks be B ∗ (?x) and C ∗ (?x). The three decompo-

sition methods are A(?x) 7→ B ∗ (?x), C ∗ (?x)5 , B ∗ (?x) 7→
B(?x, ?y), and C ∗ (?x) 7→ C(?x, ?z). For these three methods, there are at most 2n2 + n groundings plus an additional
2n new groundings of abstract tasks (B ∗ and C ∗ ), which is
a signiﬁcant improvement over the original model.
This splitting technique is related to the splitting techniques for action schemas presented by Areces et al. (2014).
Their splitting technique also splits lifted actions into multiple ones in order to reduce the number of necessary groundings. They however needed to introduce a mechanism to “coordinate” common parameters between the split actions –
i.e. additional state variables (PROCNONE, DO, and PAR (.)).
Contrary to their work, pandaPI’s splitting has an automatic
way to “coordinate” the values of common parameters of
split actions: the methods. But in a sense, their technique
is a generalisation of ours as we only allow the split if
no coordination between the “hidden” variables is needed.
Thus adapting their technique might enable more aggressive
splits, which is however future work.

Delete-Relaxed Reachability
After the initial simpliﬁcation of the domain, PANDA performs a delete-relaxed reachability analysis to determine
which groundings of primitive tasks can possibly occur in
any executable plan. PANDA’s implementation is based on
the efﬁcient planning graph implementation of STAN (Long
and Fox 1999). It is succinct in the sense that it never considers groundings that are not delete-relaxed reachable, similar
to the DATALOG-based implementation by Helmert (2009).

TDG-based Hierarchical Reachability
PANDA’s hierarchical reachability analysis is based on a
data-structure called the Task Decomposition Graph (TDG).
It was ﬁrst introduced by Bercher, Keen, and Biundo (2014)
and later reﬁned (Bercher et al. 2017). On the one hand, the
TDG is designed to compute all groundings of abstract tasks
and methods that are reachable from the initial abstract task.
Only those groundings can ever occur during the planning
process, as any other grounding can never be obtained via
decomposition as required by the solution criteria of HTN
planning. On the other hand, the TDG also removes abstract
tasks (and connected methods) which cannot be decomposed
into a primitive plan. If this is not possible, a task network
containing such a task can never be reﬁned into a solution,
as this solution must only contain primitive actions. A TDG
is a directed graph. Nodes represent either ground tasks or
ground methods. A task node has outgoing edges to each
applicable ground method, and each method has outgoing
edges to its ground subtasks. This means the graph is a representation of hierarchical reachability, i.e. which ground tasks
and methods can possibly be reached via decomposition.
Denition 3. Let P be an HTN planning problem. The bipartite graph G = 〈VT , VM , ET →M , EM →T 〉, consisting of
a set of task vertices VT , method vertices VM , and edges
ET →M and EM →T is called the TDG of P if it holds:
1. Base Case (task vertex for the given task)
cI ∈ VT , the TDG’s root.
5

To remain correct, B ∗ and C ∗ have the order of B and C.

2. Method Vertices (derived from task vertices)
Let c ∈ VT and there is a method (c, tn) ∈ M . Then, for
all groundings vm it holds that:
• vm ∈ VM
• (vt , vm ) ∈ ET →M .
3. Task Vertices (derived from method vertices)
Let vm ∈ VM with vm = (c, tn) and tn = (I, ≺, α).
Then, for all tasks i ∈ I with α(i) = vt the following
holds:
• vt ∈ VT
• (vm , vt ) ∈ EM →T .
4. Tightness G is minimal, such that 1. to 3. hold.
Note that the TDG can represent HTN planning problems
that contain cyclic methods. A cyclic decomposition is a sequence of decompositions of a grounded task c that results
in a task network containing c again. If the planning problem
contains such a cycle, the edge representing the method that
produces the recursive occurrence of c simply points back to
the vertex created for the ﬁrst occurrence of c.
TDGs constructed based on the deﬁnition contain only
those groundings reachable from the initial task by decomposition. As proposed by Elkawkagy, Schattenberg, and Biundo (2010) one can delete those method nodes that contain a primitive task not reachable in a state-based reachability analysis like the planning graph. As a consequence
of removing those methods, there may be abstract tasks in
the TDG that cannot be decomposed into a task network
containing only primitive actions any more. For example,
removing a method containing a not delete-relaxed reachable action might remove the only option to exit a recursive
method structure. If such an abstract task occurs in a task
network during decomposition, we know that it is impossible to reﬁne that task network into a solution. We can thus
prune the abstract task – and consequently all methods it
is contained it. Removing these methods may again allow
us to remove other abstract tasks, thus one can repeat this
process until convergence (Def. 4, Nr. 2b). These tasks can
be identiﬁed in polynomial time by relying on a bottom-up
reachability analysis (Alford et al. 2014, proof of Thm. 3.1).
To capture this pruning, we parametrize the previous definition of a TDG by specifying an additional set of primitive
ground tasks: these are the actions that are potentially executable, i.e. those tasks that resulted from the delete-relaxed
reachability analysis.
Denition 4. Let P be an HTN planning problem and G =
〈VT , VM , ET →M , EM →T 〉 the respective TDG according to
Def. 3. Let X be the set of executable ground actions.
′
′
, ET′ →M , EM
Then, the pruned TDG GX = 〈VT′ , VM
→T 〉
is given as the minimal connected subgraph containing cI
such that:
1. Remove Useless Method Vertices
A method vertex vm = (c, tn) ∈ VM with tn = (I, ≺, α)
′
if and only if I does not contain a task i with
is in VM
α(i) 6∈ X in case α(i) is primitive or with α(i) being
useless, in case it is abstract (see below).
2. Identify Useless Abstract Task Vertices
An abstract task vertex vt ∈ VT′ is called useless if one of
the following holds:

A

b
m3

m1

C

m4

a

m2
B

c

Figure 4: Sample Task Decomposition Tree.
(a) the pruned TDG GX does not contain children for vt
(i.e., all successors of vt were pruned)
(b) there is no acyclic connected subgraph of the pruned
TDG GX with root vt , in which every abstract method
vertex has exactly one outgoing edge and no vertex is
useless (i.e., the task vt cannot be decomposed into a
set of primitive tasks)
As an example for pruning the grounded domain using the
TDG, consider the TDG depicted in Fig. 4. It contains three
abstract tasks A, B, and C, three primitive ones a, b, and
c, as well as four methods. If all primitives are reachable,
no task or method will be pruned. Now consider, as the ﬁrst
case, that the primitive task c is not executable, i.e. that the
set of executable ground actions is X = a, b. Then the
method m2 will be removed via condition 1. of Def. 4. Since
m2 has been pruned, B will be pruned as well, as it has
no children (condition 2. (a)). This removal cascades and
also removes m1 , A, and m3 . Note that b is not removed
by Def. 4, but can be removed as it is not contained in any
method any more. Thus only C, m4 and a remain.
As a second example, consider the case where a is not
executable, i.e. X = b, c. Here the method m4 is immediately removed via condition 1. Now, each of the remaining
tasks has still applicable methods. It is however not possible
to “escape” the cycle formed by the abstract tasks A, B, and
C. Thus all three can be pruned from the TDG according to
condition 2. (b).

pandaPI’s Grounding Procedure
Recent work (Wichlacz, Torralba, and Hoffmann 2019) has
shown that PANDA’s grounding procedure can be extremely
slow on some larger, practical planning instances. Further
the analysis has shown that the runtime performance of
PANDA’s grounder scales extremely badly with increasing
size of the input problem.
We have thus developed a new grounder, pandaPI, which
we designed to fully replace PANDA’s current grounder.
The code of pandaPI is publicly available at https://github.
com/galvusdamor/pandaPIgrounder. pandaPI and PANDA’s
grounder differ in three important aspects:
1. pandaPI treats delete-relaxed reachability and TDGbased reachability uniformly
2. pandaPI uses more efﬁcient code for pruning once the
domain has been grounded, while PANDA always used
the clunky code necessary for a (potentially) lifted domain
3. pandaPI is written in C++, while PANDA is written in
Scala

As we will describe in this section, the way in which the
planning graph computes the delete-relaxed reachability of a
classical planning problem and the computation of a pruned
TDG bear striking similarities. We will generalise both procedures into a common framework, the Generalised Planning Graph (GPG). Using it, pandaPI computes both the
delete-relaxed reachability and the TDG-based reachability
with exactly the same code. Thus both parts of the grounding
procedure beneﬁt from improvements to the GPG.

Planning Graph vs TDG
The objective of the planning graph is to determine, based
on a given initial state sI , which actions can possibly be applied in any state that is delete-relaxed reachable from sI .
The planning graph maintains a set of facts F that can potentially become true, which is initialised with sI . For that,
it repeatedly checks whether the preconditions of any lifted
action can be fulﬁlled with the facts in F . If so, that action is instantiated accordingly, and its instantiated effects
are added to F . If no new action becomes applicable, the
computation stops.
For constructing the TDG, there are two opposing methods. One option is to start grounding with the initial abstract
task and ground the planning problem with a depth-ﬁrstsearch-like procedure. In it, the planner essentially applies
rules 2. and 3. of Def. 3 until convergence. If this TDG has
been constructed, we can use a marker algorithm to perform
the pruning according to Def. 4. We start by marking all
primitive actions that were reached in the planning graph.
Then we recursively mark all methods for which all subtasks are marked and the abstract tasks of a all marked methods. After convergence, we remove all non-marked tasks and
methods. This construction, however, can be problematic
as it will frequently construct groundings of abstract tasks
and methods that will be pruned afterwards – based on the
delete-relaxed reachability analysis which was performed
beforehand. The second way to construct the pruned TDG
tries to mitigate this problem by only constructing grounded
instances of methods and abstract tasks if they will not be
pruned due to Def. 4. For that, one instantiates methods and
abstract tasks only if the marker algorithm to compute decomposable abstract tasks would mark them as well. The
algorithm maintains a set A of tasks (both primitive and abstract) that will not be removed by the pruning according to
Def. 4. We start with setting A to the set of all actions that
are delete-relaxed reachable, i.e. to the result of the planning graph. Then, one repeatedly checks whether there is a
(lifted) decomposition method for which all subtasks have
ground instances in A. If so, the method is instantiated and
the grounding of its abstract task is added to A. This process is repeated until no new methods can be instantiated.
This instantiation process might – on the down side – generate instantiations that cannot be reached from the initial
abstract task. We therefore perform a depth-ﬁrst search to
discard all such instantiations. As this search is performed
on an already grounded model, it is quite fast.
Like the ﬁrst method to compute the TDG, the second
can compute unnecessary groundings, namely those that will
be removed by the depth-ﬁrst search. In order to keep these

Instances
Operators
Antecedants
Consequents

PG
facts
actions
preconditions
add effects

TDG
tasks
methods
subtasks
abstract task

Table 1: PG vs TDG
tasks to a minimum, we perform a relaxed depth-ﬁrst searchstyle propagation of types and constraints through the hierarchy, prior to the actual instantiation process. We determine
for every parameter variable of every method, task, and action which constants can be assigned to it – which is often
far less than the type of the variables allows. During the instantiation phase, we then disregard all instances which do
not comply with the computed possible set of parameters.

Generalised Planning Graph
The computations performed by the planning graph (PG)
and the TDG described in the previous section are extremely
similar in nature. Both maintain a current set of instances
with which the preconditions (or antecedants) of lifted operators are fulﬁlled. If so, the operator is added to the set
of reachable groundings and its effects (or consequents) are
added to the set of instances. This process is repeated until no new ground instantiation of a lifted operator can be
generated. We show a comparison of the two algorithms in
Tab. 1. The only difference between the two algorithms is
that the TDG will perform a depth-ﬁrst search for pruning
after grounding. Note that such a pruning step could also be
performed for the PG. Here we would remove all ground
actions that only produce effects that have no connection to
any goal fact, i.e. which can never contribute to reaching the
goal. This step is often not performed, as actions are seldom
pruned based on this criterion.
These similarities between the PG and TDG have caused
us to develop a common algorithm – the Generalised Planning Graph (GPG) – which pandaPI uses to perform both
the PG- and the TDG-based grounding. It is essentially an
implementation of the standard planning graph algorithm
which uses an generic interface to also operate on the input data structures of the TDG. We have opted not to use
a DATALOG-based implementation, which is used by Fast
Downward (Helmert 2009), as this enables us to add optimisations into the planning graph algorithm that are speciﬁc
to planning problems. We process new instances (facts and
ground tasks, respectively) in a manner s.t. any ground instantiation is only considered once. We split the set of instances I into two: a set of already processed instances Ip
and a set of unprocessed instances Iu . We repeatedly remove
instances i from Iu and add them to Ip . pandaPI then considers all lifted operators which have an antecedant which
can be fulﬁlled with i. We match the remaining antecedants
recursively with instances from Iu . This way, we never consider the same ground instances of a lifted operator twice.
We use a caching strategy to ﬁnd matching antecedants
quickly. For that we process antecedants always in the same
ﬁxed order. pandaPI constructs for every type of opera-

tor a table with is indexed with the antecedants that is to
be matched. The table contains the possible instances that
can be matched to the antecedant. For every antecedant, we
know which parameter variables have been set by matching
the prior antecedants. And thus, we know which of the variable will already have constants assigned to them. pandaPI’s
table maps the possible instantiations of these variables to
the instances that they are compatible with. By construction,
all these lists are disjunct. Whenever pandaPI needs to ﬁnd
all matching instances for an antecedant, it can access this
table and obtain only the instances that agree on the previously set variables. pandaPI actually does not have to check
whether the instance is compatible with the already assigned
variables, as it will be by construction. We can maintain this
table with little overhead and update it whenever a new instance is added to Ip .
As an example, consider the operator a(?u, ?v, ?w, ?x)
with the following antecedants:
1. p(?v, ?w)
2. p(?w, ?x)
3. q(?v, ?x, ?u)
If we are looking to instances for the third antecedant, we
will have already matched – by construction of pandaPI’s
algorithm – the two prior antecedants. Thus values for ?v,
?w, and ?x will already be known. For the third antecedant,
only two variables ?v and ?x are relevant. Thus, we have a
table mapping assignments of these variables to constants.
For example, the entry for [?v = c1 , ?x = c2 ] might contain the instances q(c1 , c2 , c3 ) and q(c1 , c2 , c2 ), but not e.g.
q(c1 , c1 , c1 ) – as this instance does not agree with the values
of ?v and ?x.
Lastly, we also use a caching procedure to determine
whether yet unmatched, i.e. future, antecedants will have
no matching instance based on the currently assigned variables. Thus, pandaPI might be able to determine after ﬁxing
an instance for the ﬁrst antecedant, that the third antecedant
does not have a matching instance any more. pandaPI will
immediately backtrack in this case and thus save the computation time needed for a potential exhaustive search until
antecedant three.
pandaPI uses the same general algorithm (Alg. 1) for
grounding as PANDA. I.e. we start with lifted domain simpliﬁcations and parameter splitting6 , then continue with
computing the planning graph and the TDG using the Generalised Planning Graph. The resulting domain is ground.
We continue checking delete-relaxed reachability and TDG
pruning until no further actions, tasks, and methods can be
removed using a specialised, efﬁcient implementation which
operates on the grounded problem.

Evaluation
In order to ascertain the quality of the grounding found by
pandaPI and its runtime performance when doing so, we
have conducted an empirical evaluation. We have compared
pandaPI against three other grounders for HTN planning
6

Note that PANDA’s parameter splitting sometimes did not split
parameters, due to a bug in the implementation. Hence the size of
the computed groundings can differ slightly.

ERR

ERR

106

10

6

106

105

105

105

104

104

104

103

103

103

102

102

102

101

101

101

Time for pandaPI in miliseconds

ERR

10

0

100
100

101

102

103

104

105

106 ERR

100
100

101

Time for GTOHP in milliseconds

(a) pandaPI vs. GTOHP

102

103

104

105

106 ERR

Time for Tree-REX in milliseconds

(b) pandaPI vs. Tree-REX

100

101

102

103

104

105

106 ERR

Time for PANDA in milliseconds

(c) pandaPI vs. PANDA

Figure 5: Runtime of pandaPI vs three other grounders. Time is measured in milliseconds. Scales are logarithmic. Domains are
colour-coded, the legend is contained in table 3.

PANDA
GTOHP
Tree-Rex

better
330
198
200

equal
0
0
0

worse
0
4
2

PANDA
GTOHP
Tree-Rex

better
0
202
96

equal
330
0
101

worse
0
0
5

PANDA
GTOHP
Tree-Rex

better
132
142
108

equal
97
0
3

worse
101
60
91

PANDA
GTOHP
Tree-Rex

better
132
182
148

equal
97
0
3

worse
101
20
51

Time
min% max%
min
94.56
99.72
1517
-74.53
99.59
-5488
-28.81
99.67
-2874
Primitive Tasks
min% max%
min
0.00
0.00
0
0.01
99.97
1
-25.00
90.64
-31
Abstract Tasks
min% max%
min
-47.43
93.48
-490
-68.14
99.11
-635
-129.30
98.17
-871
Methods
min% max%
min
-73.25
92.86 -17745
-0.01
99.91
-1
-5.00
98.15
-1

max
1172525
34963
43119

avg.%
98.55
80.17
83.39

max
0
676891
205913

avg.%
0.00
50.62
26.06

max
251
145016
11945

avg.%
6.86
43.46
16.40

max
251
1049451
232082

avg.%
6.01
65.21
36.19

Table 2: Comparison of time and grounding sizes. The better, equal, and worse columns indicate in how many instances pandaPI was better, equal, or worse than the denoted
planner. Min and Max refer to the minimum and maximum
improvement that pandaPI makes over all instances.

BARMAN
C HILDSNACK
E NTERTAINMENT
H IKING
M INECRAFT- NORMAL
ROVER - PANDA
S ATELLITE
TRANSPORT
W OODWORKING

B LOCKSWORLD
D EPOTS
G RIPPER
M INECRAFT- AREA
PCP
ROVER
S MART P HONE
UM-T RANSLOG

Table 3: Colour-codes for the individual domains.

problems: PANDA’s grounder, GTOHP’s grounder (Ramoul
et al. 2017), and Tree-Rex’s grounder (Schreiber et al. 2019).
We have not compared against FAPE (Dvorak et al. 2014) as
it cannot handle HTN planning problems containing recursion – while most benchmark instances contain recursion.
The benchmark set comprises 330 problem instances
from 17 domains. 8 domains (BARMAN, B LOCKSWORLD,
C HILDSNACK, D EPOTS, G RIPPER, H IKING, ROVER GTOHP, S ATELLITE -GTOHP) with 160 instances
stem from the evaluations of GTOHP and Tree-Rex. 2
domains (M INECRAFT- AREA, M INECRAFT- NORMAL)
with 26 instances stem from Wichlacz, Torralba, and
Hoffmann (2019). The remaining 7 domains (UMT RANSLOG, S ATELLITE -PANDA, W OORWORKING,
S MART P HONE, PCP, E NTERTAINMENT, ROVER PANDA, T RANSPORT) with 144 instances stem
from the evaluations of PANDA (Höller et al. 2018b;
Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2019a). All instance are available for download at pandapi.hierarchical-task.net/domains.
Since GTOHP and Tree-Rex can only handle totallyordered HTN planning problems, both were executed only
on those 228 instances of the benchmark set that are totallyordered, i.e. their own 8 domains plus both M INECRAFT
domains, T RANSPORT, and E NTERTAINMENT. All experiments were conducted on an Intel Xeon E5-2660 with a 20
GB RAM limit for each instance. We set no time-limit.
pandaPI was able to ground all 330 problem instances
with a maximum runtime of 38.166 seconds. The same is
true for PANDA, whose runtime reached up to 20 minutes
and 10 seconds. GTOHP was able to ground 202 of the 228
instances given to it with a maximum runtime of 41.609 seconds. It failed to ground all 26 M INECRAFT instances by exceeding the memory limit after at least 11 minutes of computation time per instance. Tree-Rex – as it uses GTOHP
as its ﬁrst step – also grounds 202 instances and fails on
M INECRAFT with a maximum runtime of 58.935 seconds.
A per-instance comparison of the runtime between pandaPI, PANDA, GTOHP, and Tree-Rex is shown in Fig. 5. A
statistical summary of timings and grounding sizes is shown

in Tab. 2. For PANDA and pandaPI we do not count the actions representing grounded method preconditions. GTOHP
and Tree-Rex consider them as part of grounded methods, thus counting them separately for PANDA and pandaPI would skew the results signiﬁcantly – as this is simply a question of where to store these the method precondition. Notably, there are only two instances where pandaPI
is slower than GTOHP, and four where it is slower than
Tree-Rex, and it is always faster than PANDA. The instances
where pandaPI is slower than GTOHP and Tree-Rex all stem
from the S ATELLITE -GTOHP domain and the difference is
at most 5.488 seconds.
Further, pandaPI creates a smaller grounding than
GTOHP in all instances, and in 96 instances compared to
Tree-Rex. The ﬁve instances in which it produces more
primitive tasks stem from the E NTERTAINMENT domain.
Here, pandaPI compiles conditional effects into multiple actions, while GTOHP and Tree-Rex can handle conditional
effects natively. When considering abstract tasks and methods, pandaPI often generates smaller groundings, but sometimes also generates larger groundings with respect to the
number of abstract tasks. This is due to our parameter splitting which may introduce additional abstract tasks. If it is
turned off (see supplemental material), our grounding is
never worse than that of GTOHP. Note that in those 20 /
51 instances in which pandaPI produces more methods, it
generates only one additional method. This is due to a compilation performed by pandaPI in case the domain speciﬁes
multiple initial abstract tasks. If so, pandaPI added a new artiﬁcial initial abstract task and a method decomposing it into
the speciﬁed tasks.
pandaPI generates on average a signiﬁcantly smaller
grounding in a signiﬁcantly smaller timeframe than the previous grounders of PANDA, GTOHP, and Tree-Rex. Especially, we think that we have overcome with pandaPI the
current problems of grounding in HTN planning as shown
by Wichlacz, Torralba, and Hoffmann (2019).
We’ve lastly compared pandaPI’s implementation of the
GPG with the currently state-of-the-art DATALOG-based
implementation in Fast Downward’s grounder (Helmert
2009). We have considered those instances that were identiﬁed as the most time-consuming to ground for Fast Downward (Helmert 2009) as reported by Helmert. These instances stem either from the domains S ATELLITE or PSR.
Since pandaPI does not support derived predicates – which
are an essential part of the modelling of PSR – we have compared our implementation of the planning graph against Fast
Downward’s DATALOG-based implementation on those
S ATELLITE instances which they reported as problematic.
The results are shown in Tab. 4 and show that pandaPI is
signiﬁcantly faster than Fast Downward on these instances.

Conclusion
Most recent systems in HTN planning realise the planning
process in a fully grounded way. A smaller grounding usually improves the performance of the planner. For example,
a smaller grounding allows for heuristics to be computed
faster – and for them to be more precise. Further, the search

#31
#33
#35

FD
15.410s
38.765s
13.590s

pandaPI
0.588s
1.339s
0.511s

#32
#34
#36

FD
25.840s
9.000s
17.200s

pandaPI
1.178s
0.338s
0.620s

Table 4: Time to ground instances of the classical S ATEL LITE domain for Fast Downward (FD) vs pandaPI
mechanics of the planner is faster the smaller the grounding is, as fewer actions and methods have to be considered.
Lastly, a smaller grounding also reduces the size of encodings, e.g. into propositional logic, which makes the translated problem (potentially) easier to solve. Despite these advantages, little work has been published on grounding techniques especially for HTN planning. We presented grounding procedure of PANDA and pandaPI and discuss how to
compute them efﬁciently. Our empirical evaluation shows
that it leads to smaller groundings than other grounder and
uses less time to compute it.

Acknowledgements
This work was partially funded by the technology transfer project “Do it yourself, but not alone: CompanionTechnology for DIY support” of the SFB/TRR 62 funded
by the German Research Foundation (DFG). The industrial project partner is the Corporate Research Sector of the
Robert Bosch GmbH.

References
Alford, R.; Bercher, P.; and Aha, D. W. 2015. Tight bounds
for HTN planning. In Proc. of the 25th Int. Conf. on Autom.
Plan. and Sched. (ICAPS 2015).
Alford, R.; Shivashankar, V.; Kuter, U.; and Nau, D. 2014.
On the feasibility of planning graph style heuristics for HTN
planning. In Proc. of the 24th Int. Conf. on Autom. Plan. and
Sched. (ICAPS 2014), 2–10. AAAI Press.
Alford, R.; Shivashankar, V.; Roberts, M.; Frank, J.; and
Aha, D. W. 2016. Hierarchical planning: Relating task and
goal decomposition with task sharing. In Proc. of the 25th
Int. Joint Conf. on AI (IJCAI 2016).
Areces, C. E.; Bustos, F.; Dominguez, M.; and Hoffmann,
J. 2014. Optimizing planning domains by automatic action
schema splitting. In Proc. of the 24th Int. Conf. on Autom.
Plan. and Sched. (ICAPS 2014), 11–19.
Behnke, G., and Biundo, S. 2018. X and more parallelism:
Integrating LTL-next into SAT-based planning with trajectory constraints while allowing for even more parallelism.
Inteligencia Articial 21(62):75–90.
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2016.
Change the plan – How hard can that be? In Proc. of the
26th Int. Conf. on Autom. Plan. and Sched. (ICAPS 2016).
Behnke, G.; Schiller, M.; Kraus, M.; Bercher, P.; Schmautz,
M.; Dorna, M.; Dambier, M.; Minker, W.; Glimm, B.; and
Biundo, S. 2019. Alice in DIY-wonderland or: Instructing
novice users on how to use tools in DIY projects. AI Communications 32(1):31–57.

Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2015. On the complexity of HTN plan veriﬁcation and its implications for plan
recognition. In Proc. of the 25th Int. Conf. on Autom. Plan.
and Sched. (ICAPS 2015).
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2017. This is a
solution! (... but is it though?) – Verifying solutions of hierarchical planning problems. In Proc. of the 27th Int. Conf.
on Autom. Plan. and Sched. (ICAPS 2017).
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2018a. totSAT –
Totally-ordered hierarchical planning through SAT. In Proc.
of the 32nd AAAI Conf. on AI (AAAI 2018).
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2018b. Tracking
branches in trees – A propositional encoding for solving
partially-ordered HTN planning problems. In Proc. of the
30th Int. Conf. on Tools with Art. Int. (ICTAI 2018).
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2019a. Bringing
order to chaos – A compact representation of partial order in
SAT-based HTN planning. In Proc. of the 33rd AAAI Conf.
on AI (AAAI 2019).
Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2019b. Finding optimal solutions in HTN planning – A SAT-based approach.
In Proc. of the 28th Int. Joint Conf. on AI (IJCAI 2019).
Bercher, P.; Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; and Biundo, S. 2016.
More than a name? On implications of preconditions and
effects of compound HTN planning tasks. In Proc. of the
22nd Europ. Conf. on AI (ECAI 2016).
Bercher, P.; Behnke, G.; Höller, D.; and Biundo, S. 2017.
An admissible HTN planning heuristic. In Proc. of the 26th
Int. Joint Conf. on AI (IJCAI 2017).
Bercher, P.; Keen, S.; and Biundo, S. 2014. Hybrid planning
heuristics based on task decomposition graphs. In Proc. of
the 7th Ann. Symp. on Combinatorial Search (SoCS 2014).
Blaylock, N., and Allen, J. 2005. Generating artiﬁcial corpora for plan recognition. In Proc. of the 10th Int. Conf. on
User Modeling (UM 2005).
Blum, A., and Furst, M. 1997. Fast planning through planning graph analysis. Articial Intelligence 90(1-2):281–300.
Bylander, T. 1994. The computational complexity of
propositional STRIPS planning. Articial Intelligence 69(12):165–204.
Dvorak, F.; Bit-Monnot, A.; Ingrand, F.; and Ghallab, M.
2014. A ﬂexible ANML actor and planner in robotics. In
Proc. of the 4th Work. on Plan. and Rob. (PlanRob 2014).
Elkawkagy, M.; Bercher, P.; Schattenberg, B.; and Biundo,
S. 2012. Improving hierarchical planning performance by
the use of landmarks. In Proc. of the 26th AAAI Conf. on AI
(AAAI 2012).
Elkawkagy, M.; Schattenberg, B.; and Biundo, S. 2010.
Landmarks in hierarchical planning. In Proc. of the 20nd
Europ. Conf. on AI (ECAI 2010), 229–234. IOS Press.
Erol, K.; Hendler, J.; and Nau, D. 1996. Complexity results
for HTN planning. Annals of Mathematics and AI 18(1).
Geier, T., and Bercher, P. 2011. On the decidability of HTN
planning with task insertion. In Proc. of the 22nd Int. Joint
Conf. on AI (IJCAI 2011).

Helmert, M. 2006. The fast downward planning system.
Journal of Articial Intelligence Research (JAIR) 26.
Helmert, M. 2009. Concise ﬁnite-domain representations
for PDDL planning tasks. Articial Intelligence 173(56):503–535.
Hoffmann, J., and Nebel, B. 2001. The FF planning system:
Fast plan generation through heuristic search. Journal of
Articial Intelligence Research (JAIR) 14:2531–302.
Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2014.
Language classiﬁcation of hierarchical planning problems.
In Proc. of the 21st Europ. Conf. on AI (ECAI 2014).
Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2016.
Assessing the expressivity of planning formalisms through
the comparison to formal languages. In Proc. of the 26th
Int. Conf. on Autom. Plan. and Sched., (ICAPS 2016).
Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; Bercher, P.; and Biundo, S. 2018a.
Plan and goal recognition as HTN planning. In Proc. of the
30th Int. Conf. on Tools with Art. Int. (ICTAI 2018).
Höller, D.; Bercher, P.; Behnke, G.; and Biundo, B. 2018b. A
generic method to guide HTN progression search with classical heuristics. In Proc. of the 28th Int. Conf. on Autom.
Plan. and Sched. (ICAPS 2018).
Höller, D.; Bercher, P.; Behnke, G.; and Biundo, S. 2018c.
Plan and goal recognition as HTN planning. In Proc. of the
AAAI 2018 Workshop on Plan, Activity, and Intent Recognition (PAIR 2018).
Höller, D.; Behnke, G.; Bercher, P.; Biundo, S.; Fiorino, H.;
Pellier, D.; and Alford, R. 2020. HDDL – A language to
describe hierarchical planning problems. In Proc. of the 34th
AAAI Conf. on AI (AAAI 2020).
Koehler, J., and Hoffmann, J. 2000. On the instantiation of
ADL operators involving arbitrary ﬁrst-order formulas. In
Proc. of the 14th Work. on New Results in Plan., Sched. and
Design (PuK 2000), 74–82.
Long, D., and Fox, M. 1999. Efﬁcient implementation of
the plan graph in STAN. Journal of Articial Intelligence
Research 10:87–115.
McDermott, D. 2000. The 1998 AI planning systems competition. AI Magazine 21(2):35–55.
Ramoul, A.; Pellier, D.; Fiorino, H.; and Pesty, S. 2017.
Grounding of HTN planning domain. International Journal
on Articial Intelligence Tools 26(5):1–24.
Rintanen, J.; Heljanko, K.; and Niemelä, I. 2006. Planning as satisﬁability: parallel plans and algorithms for plan
search. Articial Intelligence 170(12-13):1031–1080.
Rintanen, J. 2014. Madagascar: Scalable planning with
SAT. In The 2014 Int. Plann. Comp.: Descr. of Part. Plann.,
Determ. Track.
Schreiber, D.; Balyo, T.; Pellier, D.; and Fiorino, H. 2019.
Tree-REX: SAT-based tree exploration for efﬁcient and
high-quality HTN planning. In Proc. of the 29th Int. Conf.
on Autom. Plan. and Sched. (ICAPS 2019), 382–390.
Wichlacz, J.; Torralba, A.; and Hoffmann, H.
2019.
Construction-planning models in minecraft. In Proc. of the
2nd ICAPS Workshop on Hierarchical Planning.

